

Note:

This document contains FAR Part 67 including Amendment 67-18 published in the
Federal Register on 10/5/98.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

PART 67--MEDICAL STANDARDS AND CERTIFICATION
                                                       
Subpart A--General

Sec.
67.1  Applicability.
67.3  Issue.
67.7  Access to the National Driver Register.

Subpart B--First-Class Airman Medical Certificate

67.101  Eligibility.
67.103  Eye.
67.105  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium.
67.107  Mental.
67.109  Neurologic.
67.111  Cardiovascular.
67.113  General medical condition.
67.115  Discretionary issuance.

Subpart C--Second-Class Airman Medical Certificate

67.201  Eligibility.
67.203  Eye.
67.205  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium.
67.207  Mental.
67.209  Neurologic.
67.211  Cardiovascular.
67.213  General medical condition.
67.215  Discretionary issuance.

Subpart D--Third-Class Airman Medical Certificate

67.301  Eligibility.
67.303  Eye.
67.305  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium.
67.307  Mental.
67.309  Neurologic.
67.311  Cardiovascular.
67.313  General medical condition.
67.315  Discretionary issuance.

Subpart E--Certification Procedures

67.401  Special issuance of medical certificates.
67.403  Applications, certificates, logbooks, reports, and - 
records: Falsification, reproduction, or alteration; incorrect 
statements.
67.405  Medical examinations: Who may give.
67.407  Delegation of authority.
67.409  Denial of medical certificate.
67.411  Medical certificates by flight surgeons of Armed Forces.
67.413  Medical records.
67.415  Return of medical certificate after suspension or 
revocation.

    Authority: 49 U.S.C. 106(g), 40113, 44701-44703, 44707, 44709-
44711, 45102-45103, 45301-45303.

Subpart A--General

Sec. 67.1  Applicability. -

    This part prescribes the medical standards and certification 
procedures for issuing medical certificates for airmen and for 
remaining eligible for a medical certificate.

Sec. 67.3  Issue. -

    Except as provided in Sec. 67.5, a person who meets the medical 
standards prescribed in this part, based on medical examination and 
evaluation of the person's history and condition, is entitled to an 
appropriate medical certificate.


Sec. 67.7  Access to the National Driver Register. -

    At the time of application for a certificate issued under this 
part, each person who applies for a medical certificate shall execute 
an express consent form authorizing the Administrator to request the 
chief driver licensing official of any state designated by the 
Administrator to transmit information contained in the National Driver 
Register about the person to the Administrator. The Administrator shall 
make information received from the National Driver Register, if any, 
available on request to the person for review and written comment.

Subpart B -- First-Class Airman Medical Certificate

Sec. 67.101  Eligibility. -

    To be eligible for a first-class airman medical certificate, and to 
remain eligible for a first-class airman medical certificate, a person 
must meet the requirements of this subpart.

Sec. 67.103  Eye. -

    Eye standards for a first-class airman medical certificate are: -
    (a) Distant visual acuity of 20/20 or better in each eye 
separately, with or without corrective lenses. If corrective lenses 
(spectacles or contact lenses) are necessary for 20/20 vision, the 
person may be eligible only on the condition that corrective lenses are 
worn while exercising the privileges of an airman certificate. -
    (b) Near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 16 
inches in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses. If 
age 50 or older, near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 
both 16 inches and 32 inches in each eye separately, with or without 
corrective lenses. -
    (c) Ability to perceive those colors necessary for the safe 
performance of airman duties. -
    (d) Normal fields of vision. -
    (e) No acute or chronic pathological condition of either eye or 
adnexa that interferes with the proper function of an eye, that may 
reasonably be expected to progress to that degree, or that may 
reasonably be expected to be aggravated by flying. -
    (f) Bifoveal fixation and vergence-phoria relationship sufficient 
to prevent a break in fusion under conditions that may reasonably be 
expected to occur in performing airman duties. Tests for the factors 
named in this paragraph are not required except for persons found to 
have more than 1 prism diopter of hyperphoria, 6 prism diopters of 
esophoria, or 6 prism diopters of exophoria. If any of these values are 
exceeded, the Federal Air Surgeon may require the person to be examined 
by a qualified eye specialist to determine if there is bifoveal 
fixation and an adequate vergence-phoria relationship. However, if 
otherwise eligible, the person is issued a medical certificate pending 
the results of the examination.

 67.105  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium. -

    Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium standards for a first-class 
airman medical certificate are:
    (a) The person shall demonstrate acceptable hearing by at least one 
of the following tests:
    (1) Demonstrate an ability to hear an average conversational voice 
in a quiet room, using both ears, at a distance of 6 feet from the 
examiner, with the back turned to the examiner.
    (2) Demonstrate an acceptable understanding of speech as determined 
by audiometric speech discrimination testing to a score of at least 70 
percent obtained in one ear or in a sound field environment.
    (3) Provide acceptable results of pure tone audiometric testing of 
unaided hearing acuity according to the following table of worst 
acceptable thresholds, using the calibration standards of the American 
National Standards Institute, 1969 (11 West 42d Street, New York, NY 
10036):

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                500   1000   2000   3000
                Frequency (Hz)                   Hz    Hz     Hz     Hz 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Better ear (Db)...............................   35     30     30     40
Poorer ear (Db)...............................   35     50     50     60
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) No disease or condition of the middle or internal ear, nose, 
oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx that--
    (1) Interferes with, or is aggravated by, flying or may reasonably 
be expected to do so; or
    (2) Interferes with, or may reasonably be expected to interfere 
with, clear and effective speech communication.
    (c) No disease or condition manifested by, or that may reasonably 
be expected to be manifested by, vertigo or a disturbance of 
equilibrium.

Sec. 67.107  Mental.

    Mental standards for a first-class airman medical certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) A personality disorder that is severe enough to have repeatedly 
manifested itself by overt acts.
    (2) A psychosis. As used in this section, "psychosis" refers to a 
mental disorder in which:
    (i) The individual has manifested delusions, hallucinations, 
grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or other commonly accepted 
symptoms of this condition; or
    (ii) The individual may reasonably be expected to manifest 
delusions, hallucinations, grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or 
other commonly accepted symptoms of this condition.
    (3) A bipolar disorder.
    (4) Substance dependence, except where there is established 
clinical evidence, satisfactory to the Federal Air Surgeon, of 
recovery, including sustained total abstinence from the substance(s) 
for not less than the preceding 2 years. As used in this section-- --
    (i) "Substance" includes: Alcohol; other sedatives and hypnotics; 
anxiolytics; opioids; central nervous system stimulants such as 
cocaine, amphetamines, and similarly acting sympathomimetics; 
hallucinogens; phencyclidine or similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines; cannabis; 
inhalants; and other psychoactive drugs and chemicals; and
    (ii) "Substance dependence" means a condition in which a person 
is dependent on a substance, other than tobacco or ordinary xanthine-
containing (e.g., caffeine) beverages, as evidenced by--
    (A) Increased tolerance;
    (B) Manifestation of withdrawal symptoms;
    (C) Impaired control of use; or
    (D) Continued use despite damage to physical health or impairment 
of social, personal, or occupational functioning.
    (b) No substance abuse within the preceding 2 years defined as:
    (1) Use of a substance in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous, if there has been at any other time an instance 
of the use of a substance also in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous;
    (2) A verified positive drug test result acquired under an anti-
drug program or internal program of the U.S. Department of 
Transportation or any other Administration within the U.S. Department 
of Transportation; or
    (3) Misuse of a substance that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on 
case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to 
the substance involved, finds--
    (i) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (ii) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No other personality disorder, neurosis, or other mental 
condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.109  Neurologic.

    Neurologic standards for a first-class airman medical certificate 
are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) Epilepsy;
    (2) A disturbance of consciousness without satisfactory medical 
explanation of the cause; or
    (3) A transient loss of control of nervous system function(s) 
without satisfactory medical explanation of the cause.
    (b) No other seizure disorder, disturbance of consciousness, or 
neurologic condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case 
history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the 
condition involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.111  Cardiovascular.

    Cardiovascular standards for a first-class airman medical 
certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) Myocardial infarction;
    (2) Angina pectoris;
    (3) Coronary heart disease that has required treatment or, if 
untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically significant;
    (4) Cardiac valve replacement;
    (5) Permanent cardiac pacemaker implantation; or
    (6) Heart replacement;
    (b) A person applying for first-class medical certification must 
demonstrate an absence of myocardial infarction and other clinically 
significant abnormality on electrocardiographic examination:
    (1) At the first application after reaching the 35th birthday; and
    (2) On an annual basis after reaching the 40th birthday.
    (c) An electrocardiogram will satisfy a requirement of paragraph 
(b) of this section if it is dated no earlier than 60 days before the 
date of the application it is to accompany and was performed and 
transmitted according to acceptable standards and techniques.

Sec. 67.113  General medical condition.

    The general medical standards for a first-class airman medical 
certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus that requires insulin or any other hypoglycemic drug 
for control.
    (b) No other organic, functional, or structural disease, defect, or 
limitation that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No medication or other treatment that the Federal Air Surgeon, 
based on the case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment 
relating to the medication or other treatment involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.115  Discretionary issuance.

    A person who does not meet the provisions of Secs. 67.103 through 
67.113 may apply for the discretionary issuance of a certificate under 
Sec. 67.401.

Subpart C--Second-Class Airman Medical Certificate

Sec. 67.201  Eligibility.

    To be eligible for a second-class airman medical certificate, and 
to remain eligible for a second-class airman medical certificate, a 
person must meet the requirements of this subpart.

Sec. 67.203  Eye.

    Eye standards for a second-class airman medical certificate are:
    (a) Distant visual acuity of 20/20 or better in each eye 
separately, with or without corrective lenses. If corrective lenses 
(spectacles or contact lenses) are necessary for 20/20 vision, the 
person may be eligible only on the condition that corrective lenses are 
worn while exercising the privileges of an airman certificate.
    (b) Near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 16 
inches in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses. If 
age 50 or older, near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 
both 16 inches and 32 inches in each eye separately, with or without 
corrective lenses.
    (c) Ability to perceive those colors necessary for the safe 
performance of airman duties.
    (d) Normal fields of vision.
    (e) No acute or chronic pathological condition of either eye or 
adnexa that interferes with the proper function of an eye, that may reasonably be 
expected to progress to that degree, or that may reasonably be expected 
to be aggravated by flying.
    (f) Bifoveal fixation and vergence-phoria relationship sufficient 
to prevent a break in fusion under conditions that may reasonably be 
expected to occur in performing airman duties. Tests for the factors 
named in this paragraph are not required except for persons found to 
have more than 1 prism diopter of hyperphoria, 6 prism diopters of 
esophoria, or 6 prism diopters of exophoria. If any of these values are 
exceeded, the Federal Air Surgeon may require the person to be examined 
by a qualified eye specialist to determine if there is bifoveal 
fixation and an adequate vergence-phoria relationship. However, if 
otherwise eligible, the person is issued a medical certificate pending 
the results of the examination.

Sec. 67.205  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium.

    Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium standards for a second-class 
airman medical certificate are:
    (a) The person shall demonstrate acceptable hearing by at least one 
of the following tests:
    (1) Demonstrate an ability to hear an average conversational voice 
in a quiet room, using both ears, at a distance of 6 feet from the 
examiner, with the back turned to the examiner.
    (2) Demonstrate an acceptable understanding of speech as determined 
by audiometric speech discrimination testing to a score of at least 70 
percent obtained in one ear or in a sound field environment.
    (3) Provide acceptable results of pure tone audiometric testing of 
unaided hearing acuity according to the following table of worst 
acceptable thresholds, using the calibration standards of the American 
National Standards Institute, 1969:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                500   1000   2000   3000
                Frequency (Hz)                   Hz    Hz     Hz     Hz 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Better ear (Db)-..............................   35   30 -     30     40
Poorer ear (Db)-..............................   35     50     50     60
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) No disease or condition of the middle or internal ear, nose, 
oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx that--
    (1) Interferes with, or is aggravated by, flying or may reasonably 
be expected to do so; or
    (2) Interferes with, or may reasonably be expected to interfere 
with, clear and effective speech communication.
    (c) No disease or condition manifested by, or that may reasonably 
be expected to be manifested by, vertigo or a disturbance of 
equilibrium.

Sec. 67.207  Mental.

    Mental standards for a second-class airman medical certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) A personality disorder that is severe enough to have repeatedly 
manifested itself by overt acts.
    (2) A psychosis. As used in this section, "psychosis" refers to a 
mental disorder in which:
    (i) The individual has manifested delusions, hallucinations, 
grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or other commonly accepted 
symptoms of this condition; or
    (ii) The individual may reasonably be expected to manifest 
delusions, hallucinations, grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or 
other commonly accepted symptoms of this condition.
    (3) A bipolar disorder.
    (4) Substance dependence, except where there is established 
clinical evidence, satisfactory to the Federal Air Surgeon, of 
recovery, including sustained total abstinence from the substance(s) 
for not less than the preceding 2 years. As used in this section-- ---
    (i) "Substance" includes: Alcohol; other sedatives and hypnotics; 
anxiolytics; opioids; central nervous system stimulants such as 
cocaine, amphetamines, and similarly acting sympathomimetics; 
hallucinogens; phencyclidine or similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines; 
cannabis; inhalants; and other psychoactive drugs and chemicals; and
    (ii) "Substance dependence" means a condition in which a person 
is dependent on a substance, other than tobacco or ordinary xanthine-
containing (e.g., caffeine) beverages, as evidenced by--
    (A) Increased tolerance;
    (B) Manifestation of withdrawal symptoms;
    (C) Impaired control of use; or
    (D) Continued use despite damage to physical health or impairment 
of social, personal, or occupational functioning.
    (b) No substance abuse within the preceding 2 years defined as:
    (1) Use of a substance in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous, if there has been at any other time an instance 
of the use of a substance also in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous;
    (2) A verified positive drug test result acquired under an anti-
drug program or internal program of the U.S. Department of 
Transportation or any other Administration within the U.S. Department 
of Transportation; or
    (3) Misuse of a substance that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on 
case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to 
the substance involved, finds--
    (i) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (ii) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No other personality disorder, neurosis, or other mental 
condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

67.209  Neurologic.

    Neurologic standards for a second-class airman medical certificate 
are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) Epilepsy;
    (2) A disturbance of consciousness without satisfactory medical 
explanation of the cause; or
    (3) A transient loss of control of nervous system function(s) 
without satisfactory medical explanation of the cause;
    (b) No other seizure disorder, disturbance of consciousness, or 
neurologic condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case 
history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the 
condition involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

67.211  Cardiovascular.

    Cardiovascular standards for a second-class medical certificate are 
no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of the 
following:
    (a) Myocardial infarction;
    (b) Angina pectoris;
    (c) Coronary heart disease that has required treatment or, if 
untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically significant;
    (d) Cardiac valve replacement;
    (e) Permanent cardiac pacemaker implantation; or
    (f) Heart replacement.

67.213  General medical condition.

    The general medical standards for a second-class airman medical 
certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus that requires insulin or any other hypoglycemic drug 
for control.
    (b) No other organic, functional, or structural disease, defect, or 
limitation that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No medication or other treatment that the Federal Air Surgeon, 
based on the case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment 
relating to the medication or other treatment involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.215  Discretionary issuance.

     A person who does not meet the provisions of Secs. 67.203 through 
67.213 may apply for the discretionary issuance of a certificate under 
Sec. 67.401.

Subpart D--Third-Class Airman Medical Certificate

Sec. 67.301  Eligibility.

    To be eligible for a third-class airman medical certificate, or to 
remain eligible for a third-class airman medical certificate, a person 
must meet the requirements of this subpart.

Sec. 67.303  Eye.

    Eye standards for a third-class airman medical certificate are:
    (a) Distant visual acuity of 20/40 or better in each eye 
separately, with or without corrective lenses. If corrective lenses 
(spectacles or contact lenses) are necessary for 20/40 vision, the 
person may be eligible only on the condition that corrective lenses are 
worn while exercising the privileges of an airman certificate.
    (b) Near vision of 20/40 or better, Snellen equivalent, at 16 
inches in each eye separately, with or without corrective lenses.
    (c) Ability to perceive those colors necessary for the safe 
performance of airman duties.
    (d) No acute or chronic pathological condition of either eye or 
adnexa that interferes with the proper function of an eye, that may 
reasonably be expected to progress to that degree, or that may 
reasonably be expected to be aggravated by flying.

Sec. 67.305  Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium.

    Ear, nose, throat, and equilibrium standards for a third-class 
airman medical certificate are:
    (a) The person shall demonstrate acceptable hearing by at least 
one of the following tests:
    (1) Demonstrate an ability to hear an average conversational voice 
in a quiet room, using both ears, at a distance of 6 feet from the 
examiner, with the back turned to the examiner.
    (2) Demonstrate an acceptable understanding of speech as 
determined by audiometric speech discrimination testing to a score of 
at least 70 percent obtained in one ear or in a sound field 
environment.
    (3) Provide acceptable results of pure tone audiometric testing of 
unaided hearing acuity according to the following table of worst 
acceptable thresholds, using the calibration standards of the American 
National Standards Institute, 1969:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                500   1000   2000   3000
                Frequency (Hz)                   Hz    Hz     Hz     Hz 
------------------------------------------------------------------------
Better ear (Db)-..............................   35     30     30     40
Poorer ear (Db)-..............................   35     50     50     60
------------------------------------------------------------------------

    (b) No disease or condition of the middle or internal ear, nose, 
oral cavity, pharynx, or larynx that--
    (1) Interferes with, or is aggravated by, flying or may reasonably 
be expected to do so; or
    (2) Interferes with clear and effective speech communication.
    (c) No disease or condition manifested by, or that may reasonably 
be expected to be manifested by, vertigo or a disturbance of 
equilibrium.

Sec. 67.307  Mental.

    Mental standards for a third-class airman medical certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) A personality disorder that is severe enough to have 
repeatedly manifested itself by overt acts.
    (2) A psychosis. As used in this section, "psychosis" refers to 
a mental disorder in which--
    (i) The individual has manifested delusions, hallucinations, 
grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or other commonly accepted 
symptoms of this condition; or
    (ii) The individual may reasonably be expected to manifest 
delusions, hallucinations, grossly bizarre or disorganized behavior, or 
other commonly accepted symptoms of this condition.
    (3) A bipolar disorder.
    (4) Substance dependence, except where there is established 
clinical evidence, satisfactory to the Federal Air Surgeon, of 
recovery, including sustained total abstinence from the substance(s) 
for not less than the preceding 2 years. As used in this section-- -
    (i) "Substance" includes: alcohol; other sedatives and 
hypnotics; anxiolytics; opioids; central nervous system stimulants such 
as cocaine, amphetamines, and similarly acting sympathomimetics; 
hallucinogens; phencyclidine or similarly acting arylcyclohexylamines; 
cannabis; inhalants; and other psychoactive drugs and chemicals; and
    (ii) "Substance dependence" means a condition in which a person 
is dependent on a substance, other than tobacco or ordinary xanthine-
containing (e.g., caffeine) beverages, as evidenced by--
    (A) Increased tolerance;
    (B) Manifestation of withdrawal symptoms;
    (C) Impaired control of use; or
    (D) Continued use despite damage to physical health or impairment 
of social, personal, or occupational functioning.
    (b) No substance abuse within the preceding 2 years defined as:
    (1) Use of a substance in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous, if there has been at any other time an instance 
of the use of a substance also in a situation in which that use was 
physically hazardous;
    (2) A verified positive drug test result conducted under an anti-
drug rule or internal program of the U.S. Department of Transportation 
or any other Administration within the U.S. Department of 
Transportation; or
    (3) Misuse of a substance that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on 
case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to 
the substance involved, finds--
    (i) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; or
    (ii) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No other personality disorder, neurosis, or other mental 
condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.309  Neurologic.

    Neurologic standards for a third-class airman medical certificate 
are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of any of 
the following:
    (1) Epilepsy;
    (2) A disturbance of consciousness without satisfactory medical 
explanation of the cause; or
    (3) A transient loss of control of nervous system function(s) 
without satisfactory medical explanation of the cause.
    (b) No other seizure disorder, disturbance of consciousness, or 
neurologic condition that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case 
history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the 
condition involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.311  Cardiovascular.

    Cardiovascular standards for a third-class airman medical 
certificate are no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of 
any of the following:
    (a) Myocardial infarction;
    (b) Angina pectoris;
    (c) Coronary heart disease that has required treatment or, if 
untreated, that has been symptomatic or clinically significant;
    (d) Cardiac valve replacement;
    (e) Permanent cardiac pacemaker implantation; or
    (f) Heart replacement.

Sec. 67.313  General medical condition.

    The general medical standards for a third-class airman medical 
certificate are:
    (a) No established medical history or clinical diagnosis of 
diabetes mellitus that requires insulin or any other hypoglycemic drug 
for control.
    (b) No other organic, functional, or structural disease, defect, or 
limitation that the Federal Air Surgeon, based on the case history and 
appropriate, qualified medical judgment relating to the condition 
involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.
    (c) No medication or other treatment that the Federal Air Surgeon, 
based on the case history and appropriate, qualified medical judgment 
relating to the medication or other treatment involved, finds--
    (1) Makes the person unable to safely perform the duties or 
exercise the privileges of the airman certificate applied for or held; 
or
    (2) May reasonably be expected, for the maximum duration of the 
airman medical certificate applied for or held, to make the person 
unable to perform those duties or exercise those privileges.

Sec. 67.315  Discretionary issuance.

    A person who does not meet the provisions of Secs. 67.303 through 
67.313 may apply for the discretionary issuance of a certificate under 
Sec. 67.401.

Subpart E--Certification Procedures

Sec. 67.401  Special issuance of medical certificates.

    (a) At the discretion of the Federal Air Surgeon, an Authorization 
for Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate (Authorization), valid 
for a specified period, may be granted to a person who does not meet 
the provisions of subparts B, C, or D of this part if the person shows 
to the satisfaction of the Federal Air Surgeon that the duties 
authorized by the class of medical certificate applied for can be 
performed without endangering public safety during the period in which 
the Authorization would be in force. The Federal Air Surgeon may 
authorize a special medical flight test, practical test, or medical 
evaluation for this purpose. A medical certificate of the appropriate 
class may be issued to a person who does not meet the provisions of 
subparts B, C, or D of this part if that person possesses a valid 
Authorization and is otherwise eligible. An airman medical certificate 
issued in accordance with this section shall expire no later than the 
end of the validity period or upon the withdrawal of the Authorization 
upon which it is based. At the end of its specified validity period, 
for grant of a new Authorization, the person must again show to the 
satisfaction of the Federal Air Surgeon that the duties authorized by 
the class of medical certificate applied for can be performed without 
endangering public safety during the period in which the Authorization 
would be in force.
    (b) At the discretion of the Federal Air Surgeon, a Statement of 
Demonstrated Ability (SODA) may be granted, instead of an 
Authorization, to a person whose disqualifying condition is static or 
nonprogressive and who has been found capable of performing airman 
duties without endangering public safety. A SODA does not expire and 
authorizes a designated aviation medical examiner to issue a medical 
certificate of a specified class if the examiner finds that the 
condition described on its face has not adversely changed.
    (c) In granting an Authorization or SODA, the Federal Air Surgeon 
may consider the person's operational experience and any medical facts 
that may affect the ability of the person to perform airman duties 
including--
    (1) The combined effect on the person of failure to meet more than 
one requirement of this part; and
    (2) The prognosis derived from professional consideration of all 
available information regarding the person.
    (d) In granting an Authorization or SODA under this section, the 
Federal Air Surgeon specifies the class of medical certificate 
authorized to be issued and may do any or all of the following:
    (1) Limit the duration of an Authorization;
    (2) Condition the granting of a new Authorization on the results of 
subsequent medical tests, examinations, or evaluations;
    (3) State on the Authorization or SODA, and any medical certificate 
based upon it, any operational limitation needed for safety; or
    (4) Condition the continued effect of an Authorization or SODA, and 
any second- or third-class medical certificate based upon it, on 
compliance with a statement of functional limitations issued to the 
person in coordination with the Director of Flight Standards or the 
Director's designee.
    (e) In determining whether an Authorization or SODA should be 
granted to an applicant for a third-class medical certificate, the 
Federal Air Surgeon considers the freedom of an airman, exercising the 
privileges of a private pilot certificate, to accept reasonable risks 
to his or her person and property that are not acceptable in the 
exercise of commercial or airline transport pilot privileges, and, at 
the same time, considers the need to protect the safety of persons and 
property in other aircraft and on the ground.
    (f) An Authorization or SODA granted under the provisions of this 
section to a person who does not meet the applicable provisions of 
subparts B, C, or D of this part may be withdrawn, at the discretion of 
the Federal Air Surgeon, at any time if--
    (1) There is adverse change in the holder's medical condition;
    (2) The holder fails to comply with a statement of functional 
limitations or operational limitations issued as a condition of 
certification under this section;
    (3) Public safety would be endangered by the holder's exercise of 
airman privileges;
    (4) The holder fails to provide medical information reasonably 
needed by the Federal Air Surgeon for certification under this section; 
or
    (5) The holder makes or causes to be made a statement or entry that 
is the basis for withdrawal of an Authorization or SODA under Sec. 67.403.
    (g) A person who has been granted an Authorization or SODA under 
this section based on a special medical flight or practical test need 
not take the test again during later physical examinations unless the 
Federal Air Surgeon determines or has reason to believe that the 
physical deficiency has or may have degraded to a degree to require 
another special medical flight test or practical test.
    (h) The authority of the Federal Air Surgeon under this section is 
also exercised by the Manager, Aeromedical Certification Division, and 
each Regional Flight Surgeon.
    (i) If an Authorization or SODA is withdrawn under paragraph (f) of 
this section the following procedures apply:
    (1) The holder of the Authorization or SODA will be served a letter 
of withdrawal, stating the reason for the action;
    (2) By not later than 60 days after the service of the letter of 
withdrawal, the holder of the Authorization or SODA may request, in 
writing, that the Federal Air Surgeon provide for review of the 
decision to withdraw. The request for review may be accompanied by 
supporting medical evidence;
    (3) Within 60 days of receipt of a request for review, a written 
final decision either affirming or reversing the decision to withdraw 
will be issued; and
    (4) A medical certificate rendered invalid pursuant to a 
withdrawal, in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, shall be 
surrendered to the Administrator upon request.
    (j) No grant of a special issuance made prior to September 16, 
1996, may be used to obtain a medical certificate after the earlier of 
the following dates:
    (1) September 16, 1997; or
    (2) The date on which the holder of such special issuance is 
required to provide additional information to the FAA as a condition 
for continued medical certification.

Sec. 67.403  Applications, certificates, logbooks, reports, and 
records: Falsification, reproduction, or alteration; incorrect 
statements.

    (a) No person may make or cause to be made--
    (1) A fraudulent or intentionally false statement on any 
application for a medical certificate or on a request for any 
Authorization for Special Issuance of a Medical Certificate 
(Authorization) or Statement of Demonstrated Ability (SODA) under this 
part;
    (2) A fraudulent or intentionally false entry in any logbook, 
record, or report that is kept, made, or used, to show compliance with 
any requirement for any medical certificate or for any Authorization or 
SODA under this part;
    (3) A reproduction, for fraudulent purposes, of any medical 
certificate under this part; or
    (4) An alteration of any medical certificate under this part.
    (b) The commission by any person of an act prohibited under 
paragraph (a) of this section is a basis for--
    (1) Suspending or revoking all airman, ground instructor, and 
medical certificates and ratings held by that person;
    (2) Withdrawing all Authorizations or SODA's held by that person; 
and
    (3) Denying all applications for medical certification and requests 
for Authorizations or SODA's.
    (c) The following may serve as a basis for suspending or revoking a 
medical certificate; withdrawing an Authorization or SODA; or denying 
an application for a medical certificate or request for an 
authorization or SODA:
    (1) An incorrect statement, upon which the FAA relied, made in 
support of an application for a medical certificate or request for an 
Authorization or SODA.-
    (2) An incorrect entry, upon which the FAA relied, made in any 
logbook, record, or report that is kept, made, or used to show 
compliance with any requirement for a medical certificate or an 
Authorization or SODA.

Sec. 67.405  Medical examinations: Who may give. -

    (a) First-class. Any aviation medical examiner who is specifically 
designated for the purpose may give the examination for the first-class 
medical certificate. Any interested person may obtain a list of these 
aviation medical examiners, in any area, from the FAA Regional Flight 
Surgeon of the region in which the area is located. -
    (b) Second- and third-class. Any aviation medical examiner may give 
the examination for the second- or third-class medical certificate. Any 
interested person may obtain a list of aviation medical examiners, in 
any area, from the FAA Regional Flight Surgeon of the region in which 
the area is located.

Sec. 67.407  Delegation of authority. -

    (a) The authority of the Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44703 to 
issue or deny medical certificates is delegated to the Federal Air 
Surgeon to the extent necessary to-- -
    (1) Examine applicants for and holders of medical certificates to 
determine whether they meet applicable medical standards; and -
    (2) Issue, renew, and deny medical certificates, and issue, renew, 
deny, and withdraw Authorizations for Special Issuance of a Medical 
Certificate and Statements of Demonstrated Ability to a person based 
upon meeting or failing to meet applicable medical standards. -
    (b) Subject to limitations in this chapter, the delegated functions 
of the Federal Air Surgeon to examine applicants for and holders of 
medical certificates for compliance with applicable medical standards 
and to issue, renew, and deny medical certificates are also delegated 
to aviation medical examiners and to authorized representatives of the 
Federal Air Surgeon within the FAA. -
    (c) The authority of the Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44702, to 
reconsider the action of an aviation medical examiner is delegated to 
the Federal Air Surgeon; the Manager, Aeromedical Certification 
Division; and each Regional Flight Surgeon. Where the person does not 
meet the standards of Secs. 67.107(b)(3) and (c), 67.109(b), 67.113(b) 
and (c), 67.207(b)(3) and (c), 67.209(b), 67.213(b) and (c), 
67.307(b)(3) and (c), 67.309(b), or 67.313(b) and (c), any action taken 
under this paragraph other than by the Federal Air Surgeon is subject 
to reconsideration by the Federal Air Surgeon. A certificate issued by an 
aviation medical examiner is considered to be affirmed as issued unless 
an FAA official named in this paragraph (authorized official) reverses 
that issuance within 60 days after the date of issuance. However, if 
within 60 days after the date of issuance an authorized official 
requests the certificate holder to submit additional medical 
information, an authorized official may reverse the issuance within 60 
days after receipt of the requested information. -
    (d) The authority of the Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44709 to re-
examine any civil airman to the extent necessary to determine an 
airman's qualification to continue to hold an airman medical 
certificate, is delegated to the Federal Air Surgeon and his or her 
authorized representatives within the FAA.

Sec. 67.409  Denial of medical certificate. -

    (a) Any person who is denied a medical certificate by an aviation 
medical examiner may, within 30 days after the date of the denial, 
apply in writing and in duplicate to the Federal Air Surgeon, 
Attention: Manager, Aeromedical Certification Division, AAM-300, 
Federal Aviation Administration, P.O. Box 26080, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma 73126, for reconsideration of that denial. If the person does 
not ask for reconsideration during the 30-day period after the date of 
the denial, he or she is considered to have withdrawn the application 
for a medical certificate. -
    (b) The denial of a medical certificate---
    (1) By an aviation medical examiner is not a denial by the 
Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44703.-
    (2) By the Federal Air Surgeon is considered to be a denial by the 
Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44703. -
    (3) By the Manager, Aeromedical Certification Division, or a 
Regional Flight Surgeon is considered to be a denial by the 
Administrator under 49 U.S.C. 44703 except where the person does not 
meet the standards of Secs. 67.107(b)(3) and (c), 67.109(b), or 
67.113(b) and (c); 67.207(b)(3) and (c), 67.209(b), or 67.213(b) and 
(c); or 67.307(b)(3) and (c), 67.309(b), or 67.313(b) and (c). -
    (c) Any action taken under Sec. 67.407(c) that wholly or partly 
reverses the issue of a medical certificate by an aviation medical 
examiner is the denial of a medical certificate under paragraph (b) of 
this section. -
    (d) If the issue of a medical certificate is wholly or partly 
reversed by the Federal Air Surgeon; the Manager, Aeromedical 
Certification Division; or a Regional Flight Surgeon, the person 
holding that certificate shall surrender it, upon request of the FAA.

Sec. 67.411  Medical certificates by flight surgeons of Armed Forces. -

    (a) The FAA has designated flight surgeons of the Armed Forces on 
specified military posts, stations, and facilities, as aviation medical 
examiners. -
    (b) An aviation medical examiner described in paragraph (a) of this 
section may give physical examinations for the FAA medical certificates 
to persons who are on active duty or who are, under Department of 
Defense medical programs, eligible for FAA medical certification as 
civil airmen. In addition, such an examiner may issue or deny an 
appropriate FAA medical certificate in accordance with the regulations 
of this chapter and the policies of the FAA. -
    (c) Any interested person may obtain a list of the military posts, 
stations, and facilities at which a flight surgeon has been designated 
as an aviation medical examiner from the Surgeon General of the Armed 
Force concerned or from the Manager, Aeromedical Education Division, 
AAM-400, Federal Aviation Administration, P.O. Box 26082, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma 73125.

Sec. 67.413  Medical records. -

    (a) Whenever the Administrator finds that additional medical 
information or history is necessary to determine whether an applicant 
for or the holder of a medical certificate meets the medical standards 
for it, the Administrator requests that person to furnish that 
information or to authorize any clinic, hospital, physician, or other 
person to release to the Administrator all available information or 
records concerning that history. If the applicant or holder fails to 
provide the requested medical information or history or to authorize 
the release so requested, the Administrator may suspend, modify, or 
revoke all medical certificates the airman holds or may, in the case of 
an applicant, deny the application for an airman medical certificate. -
    (b) If an airman medical certificate is suspended or modified under 
paragraph (a) of this section, that suspension or modification remains 
in effect until the requested information, history, or authorization is 
provided to the FAA and until the Federal Air Surgeon determines 
whether the person meets the medical standards under this part.

Sec. 67.415  Return of medical certificate after suspension or 
revocation-

    The holder of any medical certificate issued under this part that 
is suspended or revoked shall, upon the Administrator's request, return 
it to the Administrator..


14 CFR 67 * Amendment 67-17 * 3/19/96

